docs(snapcraft): aggregate lifecycle docs into an explanation (#163)
canonical/open-documentation-academy: snapcraft/explanation/parts-lifecycle.md

1. **Stage**: copies the built components into the staging area. 
    * This is the first time all the different parts that make up the snap are actually placed in the same directory. If multiple parts provide the same file with differing contents, you will get a conflict. You can avoid these conflicts by using the [`stage` keyword](/t/snapcraft-parts-metadata/8336#heading--stage) to enable or block files coming from the part. You can also use this keyword to filter out files that are not required in the snap itself, for example build files specific to a single part.
1. **Prime**: copies the staged components into the priming area. 
    * This is very similar to the stage step, but files go into the priming area instead of the staging area. The `prime` step exists because the staging area might still contain files that are required for the build but not for the snap. For example, if you have a part that downloads and installs a compiler, then you stage this part so other parts can use the compiler during building. You can then use the `prime` filter keyword to make sure that it doesn't get copied to the priming area, so it's not taking up space in the snap. 

>     * During this step, if specific `permissions` were specified, they will be applied.

Reviewer: What exactly is meant by 'permissions' here? I'm not familiar with this aspect of the prime step.

Author: I suppose it is indeed more of a "craft" thing but because there is an existing [documentation](https://canonical-snapcraft.readthedocs-hosted.com/en/stable/reference/parts_steps/#permissions) I thought it would be useful to mention it for the users. 
It works just fine for snaps (I tested it) and allows to change the permissions of specific files during the prime step.

See [Parts environment variables](/t/parts-environment-variables/12271) for more details.

<!--
| Step | Explanation | Source directory | Result directory |
|--|--|--|--|
| **pull** | downloads and retrieves the sources | *as specified by [`source`](https://forum.snapcraft.io/t/snapcraft-parts-metadata/8336#heading--source) key* | CRAFT_PART_**SRC** |
| **build** <br> *organise*  | builds the part <br> renames built files | CRAFT_PART_**BUILD** <br> CRAFT_PART_**INSTALL** | CRAFT_PART_**INSTALL** <br> CRAFT_PART_**INSTALL** |
| **stage** | copies built files to shared stage directory | CRAFT_PART_**INSTALL** | CRAFT_**STAGE** |
| **prime** | copies staged files to shared prime directory | CRAFT_PART_**INSTALL*** | SNAPCRAFT_**PRIME** |
| **snap** | packs contents of prime directory into a snap | CRAFT_**PRIME** | CRAFT_PROJECT_DIR |
-->

<h3 id='heading--overriding'>Overriding a step<sup><a href=#heading--overriding>⚓</a></sup></h3>

Each plugin defines the default actions that happen during a step. This behavior can be changed in two ways:
- By using `override-<step-name>` in `snapcraft.yaml`. See [Overriding steps](/t/scriptlets/4892) for more details.

> - By using a local plugin.  This can inherit the parent plugin or scaffolding from the original. See [Local plugins](/t/writing-local-plugins/5125) for more details. Please note that using a local plugin is deprecated for base core22 and onwards. Because it hasn't been supported for recent bases, it will need a core20 to work.  

Reviewer: > Please note that using a local plugin is deprecated for base core22 and onwards. Because it hasn't been supported for recent bases, it will need a core20 to work.  

This phrasing feels a little cludgy; local plugins aren't just deprecated, they're wholly unsupported (albeit, there's technically some tricks you can pull, but we don't mention that...). "it will need a core20" should probably read "the snap must use `base: core20` or earlier".

Author: ```suggestion
- By using a local plugin.  This can inherit the parent plugin or scaffolding from the original. See [Local plugins](/t/writing-local-plugins/5125) for more details. Please note that using a local plugin has been deprecated in `base: core20` and fully removed in `base: core22`.  
```
I chose to frame it this way so the users are not led to think they should use core20 while 20.04 will reach end of free support in a few months. What do you think?

Author: For the `organize` link, do you want me to pull the [reference ](https://snapcraft.io/docs/snapcraft-yaml-schema#organize-79) in CODA and add an anchor? Maybe each key from this page would benefit of having an anchor but that would be a different issue I suppose? I can as well use this link https://snapcraft.io/docs/snapcraft-yaml-schema#p-21225-organize-79, even if it is not ideal, that would be a middle ground before the issue on anchors is done? Either way, I can do what you think is best.

Reviewer: The new language is great!

I agree that each key should have its own anchor (why do to the sidebar hyperlinks not include links to the specific parts directives, for instance?), and I agree that doing this would be more apt as a separate issue. But I think at that point we are fast approaching a design consideration that I don't think I'm qualified for; @degville @medubelko?

Reviewer 2: @Sophie-Pages 

> For the organize link, do you want me to pull the [reference ](https://snapcraft.io/docs/snapcraft-yaml-schema#organize-79)in CODA and add an anchor? Maybe each key from this page would benefit of having an anchor but that would be a different issue I suppose?

There's no need to add more pages to this branch; I can sort out the particulars of links between pages when I move this to Discourse. :)

1. **Prime**: copies the staged components into the priming area.
    * This is very similar to the stage step, but files go into the priming area instead of the staging area. The `prime` step exists because the staging area might still contain files that are required for the build but not for the snap. For example, if you have a part that downloads and installs a compiler, then you stage this part so other parts can use the compiler during building. You can then use the `prime` filter keyword to make sure that it doesn't get copied to the priming area, so it's not taking up space in the snap.
    * To apply specific permissions to files, you can use the `permissions` keyword.
    * Some extra checks are also run during this step to ensure that all dependencies are satisfied for a proper run time. If confinement was set to `classic`, then files will be scanned and, if needed, patched to work with this confinement mode.

> 1. **Pack**: takes the entire contents of the `prime` directory and packs it into [a snap](/t/the-snap-format/698).

Reviewer 3: Yep, this looks comprehensive and correct to me!

> 1. **Pack**: takes the entire contents of the `prime` directory and packs it into [a snap](/t/the-snap-format/698).

Reviewer 2: Thanks!

<h3 id='heading--directories'>Directories<sup><a href=#heading--directories>⚓</a></sup></h3>

When running through its lifecycle steps, a part will use different working directories. The directories' names closely follow the steps' names.

| Environment variable | Directory | Purpose |
|--|--|--|
| `CRAFT_PART_SRC` | **`parts/<part-name>/src`** | the location of the source after the *pull* step |
| `CRAFT_PART_BUILD` | **`parts/<part-name>/build`** | the working directory during the *build* step |
| `CRAFT_PART_INSTALL`| **`parts/<part-name>/install`** | contains the results of the *build* step and the stage packages. It is also the directory where the `organize` event renames the built files |
| `CRAFT_STAGE` | **`stage`** | shared by all parts, this directory contains the contents of each part's `CRAFT_PART_INSTALL` after the *stage* step. It can contain development libraries, headers, and other components (e.g. pkgconfig files) that need to be accessible from other parts |
| `CRAFT_PRIME` | **`prime`** | shared by all parts, this directory holds the final components after the *prime* step |

> | `CRAFT_PROJECT_DIR` | path to the current project's subtree in the filesystem. | path to the resulting snap after the *pack* step |

Reviewer 3: I'm not sure the "purpose" section is useful information in this context. `$CRAFT_PROJECT_DIR` only exists when snapcraft is running.  But when snapcraft is running, it doesn't matter where the resulting snap will go.

This variable is more used for accessing a resource in your project directory when the lifecycle is running. For example, [`icon: $CRAFT_PROJECT_DIR/resources/icons/128-apps-ghostwriter.png`](https://github.com/KDE/ghostwriter/blob/6cc5988c4bdd713c1126cfa3235427eb6709b660/snapcraft.yaml#L10).

I can't think of a succinct way to write this, maybe something like:
```suggestion
| `CRAFT_PROJECT_DIR` | path to the current project's subtree in the filesystem. | This is used to access resources from the project's subtree, such as an icon or version file.)|
```

All parts within a project, by means of the logic encoded the plugins they're using, all go through the same series of steps. Knowing these steps, and which directories are used for each step, can help when creating more advanced snaps, and when troubleshooting build issues.

- [Lifecycle steps](#heading--steps)
- [Steps commands](#heading--steps-commands)
- [Steps dependencies](#heading--steps-dependencies)
- [Overriding a step](#heading--overriding-steps)
- [Parts directories](#heading--parts-directories)

---

<h3 id='heading--steps'>Lifecycle steps<sup><a href=#heading--steps>⚓</a></sup></h3>

The steps of a part goes through are as follows:

1. **pull**: downloads or otherwise retrieves the components needed to build the part. You can use the [`source-*` keywords](/t/snapcraft-parts-metadata/8336#heading--source) of a part to specify which components to retrieve. If `source` points to a git repository, for example, the pull step will clone that repository.

> 1. **build**: constructs the part from the previously pulled components. The [`plugin`](/t/snapcraft-plugins/4284) of a part specifies how it is constructed. The [`meson` plugin](/t/the-meson-plugin/8623), for example, executes `meson` and `ninja` to compile source code. Each part is built in a separate directory, but it can use the contents of the staging area if it specifies a dependency on other parts using the `after` keyword. See [Step dependencies](#heading--step-dependencies) for more information.

Reviewer: I will note that `organize` is missing -- considering its importance and relationship to the `stage` and `prime` keywords, it should be included here.

Reviewer 2: We have a problem in the existing docs where they imply that `organize` it itself a step, rather than a before/after events. `organize` belongs to Stage, not Build, so I think we should be careful about where we lodge the keys and how we organise the lifecycle.

One way we could model and present the timeline is with – to use an idea from music – _on beat_ events for steps (**one** and **two** and) and _off beat_ events for the in-between procedures (one **and** two **and**). Shown as a tree:

1. Pull
    1. `after`
    2. etc
2. Overlay
    1. `overlay-script` (to borrow a case from Rockcraft)
    2. etc
4. Build
    1. `build-packages`
    2. `build-snaps`
    3. etc

For absolute correctness, it would probably need to be presented as a table that resembles a gantt-like schedule.

If we did this, whether we include _all_ the keys remains a question. There are many. I think Sophie is already on the right track by including the most important in-between events and providing examples.

Do you think this could be a helpful way to map the steps?

Reviewer: I'm not familiar with such a style, but it's potentially a helpful way of organizing this information -- at the very least, I wouldn't see any harm in attempting adding a structure like this!

Is it not the case that `organize` belongs to the build step? I believe `organize`d bits will end up modified in the part's `$CRAFT_PART_INSTALL`, which then *carries over* into `$CRAFT_STAGE`.

Reviewer 2: > Is it not the case that `organize` belongs to the build step?

I might be misled. `organize` is described as both part of the [stage step](https://canonical-craft-parts.readthedocs-hosted.com/en/latest/common/craft-parts/reference/part_properties.html#organize) and the [build step](https://canonical-craft-parts.readthedocs-hosted.com/en/latest/common/craft-parts/reference/part_properties.html#summary-of-keys-and-steps).

@mr-cal Which is correct?

Reviewer 3: `organize` is the last event in the build step.  It moves files within `$CRAFT_PART_INSTALL`.  

> I believe organized bits will end up modified in the part's $CRAFT_PART_INSTALL, which then carries over into $CRAFT_STAGE. 

@dilyn-corner is correct here.

<h3 id='heading--steps-dependencies'>Steps dependencies<sup><a href=#heading--steps-dependencies>⚓</a></sup></h3>

Each lifecycle step depends on the completion of the previous step for that part, so to reach a desired step, all prior steps need to have successfully run. By default, `snapcraft` runs the same lifecycle step of all parts before moving to the next step. However, you can change this behavior using the `after` keyword in the definition of a part in `snapcraft.yaml`. This creates a dependency chain from one part to another.

```yaml
 grv:
    plugin: go
    go-channel: 1.11/stable
    after:
      - libgit2
```

In the above example, the part named `grv` will be built after the part named `libgit2` has been successfully built _and_ staged.

<h3 id='heading--overriding-steps'>Overriding a step<sup><a href=#heading--overriding-steps>⚓</a></sup></h3>

Each plugin defines the default actions that happen during a step. This behavior can be changed in two ways.

- By using `override-<step-name>` in `snapcraft.yaml`. See [Overriding steps](/t/scriptlets/4892) for more details.

> - By using a local plugin.  This can inherit the parent plugin or scaffolding from the original. See [Local plugins](/t/writing-local-plugins/5125) for more details.

Reviewer: It may be prudent to mention that this hasn't been supported for recent bases in snaps for several years -- I believe the cut-off is core20?

See [Parts environment variables](/t/parts-environment-variables/12271) for a list of part-specific environment variables that can be accessed to help build a part.

<h3 id='heading--parts-directories'>Parts directories<sup><a href=#heading--parts-directories>⚓</a></sup></h3>

When running through its build steps, a part will use different working directories. These closely follow the step names for the lifecycle.

The directories are specified by their environment variables:
- **Snapcraft 7+**: environment variables start with `CRAFT_`
- **Snapcraft 6, and earlier**: variables start with `SNAPCRAFT_` but are otherwise identical

See [Parts environment variables](/t/parts-environment-variables/12271) for more details.

| Environment variable | Directory | Purpose |
|--|--|--|
| `CRAFT_PART_SRC` | **`parts/<part-name>/src`** | the location of the source during the *pull* step |
| `CRAFT_PART_BUILD` | **`parts/<part-name>/build`** | the working directory during the *build* step |
| `CRAFT_PART_INSTALL`| **`parts/<part-name>/install`** | contains the results of the *build* step and the stage packages. |

> | `CRAFT_STAGE` | **`stage`** | shared by all parts, this directory contains the development libraries, headers, and other components (e.g.; pkgconfig files) that need to be accessible from other parts |

Reviewer: "This directory *can* contain" -- it isn't necessary that they do so (depends on the plugin, `stage:`, the build script in the source itself, actions in `override-build`, etc.)
Likewise it *definitely* contains the contents of each part's `CRAFT_PART_INSTALL` sans any likewise shenanigans as above.
